CHAPTER EIGHT

The Race Against Time

THE SKY WAS FALLING. They were flying through the hole in the sky, and parts of the heavens were dropping off and crashing down onto the Heart of Magic below. Luka (once again wrapped up for warmth in Soraya’s charmed shawl) could not feel the wind inside the defensive bubble Soraya had erected around the Flying Carpet, but he could see its effects on the world below. Whole trees had been uprooted and went flying through the air as if they had been blown off a huge dandelion clock; fierce leather-winged dragons were being tossed hither and yon like children’s toys; and the Gossamer Net Heaven, the most fragile area of the Heart of Magic, made up of fifty-five layers of glistening webs, had been torn to shreds. The “Great Pure Realm,” the legendary Library of Lingpao T’ien-tsun, which had survived for thousands of years in the Gossamer Net, was no more. Its ancient volumes were borne aloft, their torn pages fluttering like wings. “The Winds of Change are blowing,” cried the Elephant Drake, and the Elephant Duck mourned, “Our little knowledge counts for nothing when you compare it to the wisdom that is being destroyed today.” It was almost impossible for Luka to hear what they were saying because there was a screaming in the wind that seemed, well, alive. It was Coyote, his hair standing on end, who explained that the Wind Shriekers are loose, an when they get to shriekin, why the whole of creation is fit to come apart at the seam. Luka decided he didn’t want to ask who or what the Wind Shriekers might be.
Luka, along with Coyote, the Elephant Birds, Bear, the dog, and Dog, the bear, sat tensely near the leading edge of the Flying Carpet, watching the turbulent World flash past. Behind them, at the carpet’s center, Soraya stood with her eyes closed and her arms outstretched, forcing Resham to achieve speeds it had never touched before; and behind her, with his hands on her shoulders, lending her his strength, knelt the gigantic old naked man whom Luka had never met. It’s him, Coyote hissed into Luka’s ear. The Old Boy. First an greatest. Heard bout your run an came out to lend a hand. The Old Boy. After all this time. It’s a fine thing, kid. It honors us all.
They flew out of the Heart of Magic and the Forking Paths were below them, their waters boiling, leaping into the air to form hanging walls of liquid, then falling back again in floods. “So this is Level Nine,” Luka heard himself saying, and Soraya answered grimly, “No, this is the End of the World.”
The Inescapable Whirlpool and the El Tiempo time-trap were swirling around faster and faster, sucking material into their mouths with ever greater force, and Soraya had to take the Flying Carpet dangerously high, sixty-one miles above the Earth’s surface, less than a mile from the Kármán line, but there was still a moment when Soraya had to take the Flying Carpet dangerously high, sixty-one miles above the Earth’s surface, less than a mile from the Kármán line, but there was still a moment when Soraya had to take the Flying Carpet dangerously high, sixty-one miles above the Earth’s surface, less than a mile from the Kármán line, but there was still a moment when Soraya had to take the Flying Carpet dangerously high, sixty-one miles above the Earth’s surface, less than a mile from the Kármán line, but there was still a moment when—They were almost trapped, and then they broke free and flew like a missile from a boy’s slingshot in a direction which Soraya was unable to control. The Flying Carpet was spinning around and around like a coin, and its passengers clung to one another for dear life. Luka didn’t notice the Great Stagnation below them, and then they were at the Mists of Time. The Mists were in trouble, too: large holes and tears had appeared in that formerly impenetrable wall of gray. Inside the Mists the Carpet was still spinning, and the Memory Birds wept with the fear of Oblivion, and Coyote howled, and things could have become unbearable if the “Old Boy,” the Titan Prometheus, had not risen to his feet and spoken for the first time, using words of Power. “Khulo!” he roared at the swirling fog of nothingness. “I did not escape the Bird of Zeus to perish in a fog! Dafa ho! Begone, foul Curtain, and let us be on our way.” And at once the Flying Carpet emerged from the Mists, and Luka could see where they were.
It was not a cheerful sight. They had been blown far away from the River. The City of Dreams was below them now, and as Soraya fought to steer the Flying Carpet in the right direction, Luka could see the towers of the Dream City toppling like card palaces, its homes lying in roofless ruin, and he saw, too, many of the unhoused Dreams, which flourished only behind drawn curtains in comfortable darkness, staggering into the bright streets to collapse and wither in the light. Nightmares galloped blindly down the City’s roads, and only a few citizens seemed unaffected; but even these were wandering about vaguely, not paying attention to the chaos around them, as if they lived in worlds of their own. “Those must be Daydreams,” Luka guessed.
The collapse of the World of Magic terrified him, because it could only mean that Rashid Khalifa’s life was sliding down its last slope, and so, while Luka watched in horror the crumbling of the fields and farms of the Land of Lost Childhood, while he saw the smoke rising from the forest fires burning on the Blue Remembered Hills, while he witnessed the collapse of the City of Hope, all he could think was, “Get me back in time, please don’t let me be too late, just get me back in time.”
Then he saw the Cloud Fortress of Baadal-Garh heading toward them at high speed, its massive fortifications intact, the Cloud upon which it stood boiling and bubbling like a sped-up film of itself, and with a sinking heart he understood that his final battle still lay ahead. His left hand clutched at the Ott Pot hanging around his neck, and its warmth gave him a little strength. He crawled on all fours along the Flying Carpet until he reached Soraya—it was impossible to walk on that rippling, zooming, wind-tossed rug—and he asked, already knowing the answers, “Who is in charge of that Fortress? Do they mean us any harm?” Soraya’s face and body were filled with tension. “I wish we hadn’t outrun the Otter Air Force,” she said, almost to herself. “But, anyway, they wouldn’t have been much use against this enemy.” Then she turned sadly to Luka and answered him. “In my heart of hearts I knew this would happen,” she said. “I didn’t know where or how or when, but I knew they would not stand back. It is the Aalim, Luka—the Guardians of the Fire, the lords of Time: Jo-Hua, Jo-Hai, Jo-Aiga. A harsher Trinity you never will see. And with them, just as I suspected, there is a traitor and a turncoat. Look, there upon the battlement. That vermilion bush shirt. That battered Panama hat. There is the scoundrel, among the ranks of your deadliest foes.”
Yes, it was Nobodaddy, no longer a transparent specter, but looking as solid as any man. Rage and misery wrestled with each other in Luka’s heart, but he fought them both back. This was a situation for calm minds. The Fortress City of Baadal-Garh was upon them, and as it neared, it grew. The Cloud upon which it stood spread around the Flying Carpet of King Solomon the Wise, and as it encircled them, so did the Fortress’s lengthening walls. They were in a prison in the sky, Luka realized, and even though the air above them was clear he was sure that some unseen barrier would block their way if they attempted to escape. They were the prisoners of Time, and the Flying Carpet came to a halt right below the battlement where the creature Luka had known as Nobodaddy stood, looking down at them with scorn.
“Look at me,” he said. “As you see, you are already too late.”
Luka had to fight for self-control then, but he managed to shout back, “That can’t be true, otherwise you’d no longer be around, would you? If you were telling the truth about what happens when your work is done then you’d have done that opposite-of-the-Bang thing, you’d—whatever you called it—‘un-become,’ and you told me you didn’t want to do that …”
“Un-Be,” Nobodaddy corrected him. “You should know the terminology by now. Oh, and when I said I didn’t want to do that? I lied. Why would any creature not want to do the thing it was created for? If you’re born to dance, you dance. If you’re born to sing, you don’t sit around keeping your mouth shut. And if you come into being in order to eat a man’s life, then finishing the job and Un-Being after it’s done is the supreme achievement, the absolutely satisfying climax. Yes! A thing of ecstasy.”
“It sounds like you’re in love with death, to be honest with you,” said Luka, and then understood the meaning of what he’d said.
“Quite,” said Nobodaddy. “Now you get it. I do confess to a measure of self-love. And that is not a noble quality, I readily concede the point. But, I repeat: ecstasy. All the more so in a case like this one. Your father has fought me with all his might, I should tell you. My compliments to him. He clearly feels he has powerful reasons to stay alive, and maybe you are one of those reasons. But I have my hand on his throat now. And you are right: when I said you were too late, I lied again. Look.”
He held up his right hand, and Luka could see that half of the middle finger was missing. “That’s all the life he has left,” said Nobodaddy. “And while we’re talking, he’s emptying out, and I am filling up. Who knows? Maybe you’ll still be around to witness the great event. You can certainly forget about getting home in time to save him, even if you do have the Fire of Life in that Ott Pot around your neck. Congratulations on getting that far, by the way. Level Eight! Quite an achievement. But now, let’s not forget, Time is on my side.”
“You turned out to be a nasty piece of work, and no mistake,” said Luka. “What a fool I was to be taken in by you.”
Nobodaddy laughed a cold laugh. “Ah, but if you hadn’t gone along with me, there would have been none of this fun,” he said. “You’ve made the wait so much more enjoyable. I really have to thank you for that.”
“It’s all been just a game to you!” Luka shouted, but Nobodaddy wagged the half-finger at him. “No, no,” he said reprovingly. “Never just a game. It’s a matter of life and death.”
Dog, the bear, stood up on his hind legs and growled, “I can’t stand this fellow anymore. Let me at him.” But Nobodaddy was out of Dog’s reach up there on his rampart, and there seemed to be no way up. Then, in his deep, deep voice, the Titan spoke, the scarred Old Boy himself. “Leave him to me,” he said, and got up from his kneeling position behind Soraya; and rose; and rose; and rose. When a Titan grows to his full size, the universe trembles. (The universe also tries to look away, because nakedness enlarged in this way is much, much bigger than regular-sized nakedness, and harder to ignore.) Long ago, the Old Boy’s uncle had risen up like this and destroyed the sky itself. After that, the battle of the Greek gods against the Twelve Titans had shaken the Earth as the colossi fought and fell. The Old Boy, a veteran and hero of that war, scorning clothes as Greek Heroes and Ancients always had, rose up and grew so big that Soraya had to hurry to enlarge the Flying Carpet to its maximum size, before they were all pushed off it by the Old Boy’s enlarging feet. Luka was pleased to note the look of fear on Nobodaddy’s face as the Titan reached out an enormous left hand, grabbed him, and held him fast. “Let me go,” squealed Nobodaddy—his voice was sounding inhuman now, Luka thought. It was goblinish, demonic, and, at this precise moment, it was shriekingly scared.
“Unhand me,” shrieked Nobodaddy. “You have no right to do this!”
The Old Boy grinned a grin the size of a stadium. “Ah, but I have a left,” he said, “and we left-handers stick together, you know.”
With that, he drew back his hand as far as it would go, with Nobodaddy kicking and squeaking in his grip, and then he hurled that dreadful, deceiving, life-sucking creature far, far away, up into the sky, howling all the way to the edge of the atmosphere and then out beyond the Kármán line, where the world ended and the blackness of outer space began.
“We’re still trapped,” Dog, the bear, pointed out grouchily, because he felt a little upstaged by the Titan’s titanic effort. Then, too loudly, and in too challenging a manner, he added, “Where are these Aalim, anyway? Let them show themselves, unless they’re too scared to face us.”
“Be careful what you wish for,” said Soraya hurriedly, but it was too late.
   “It is not known,” said Rashid Khalifa, “if the Aalim have actual physical form. Perhaps they do have bodies, or perhaps they can simply take on bodily shapes when they need to, and at other times they are disembodied entities, spreading out through space—because Time is everywhere, after all; there’s nowhere that doesn’t have its Yesterdays, that doesn’t live in a Today, that doesn’t hope for a good Tomorrow. Anyway, the Aalim are known for their extreme reluctance to appear in public, preferring to work in silence and behind the scenes. When they have been glimpsed, they have always been hidden inside hooded cloaks, like monks. Nobody has ever seen their faces, and everyone is afraid of their passing—except for a few particular children …”
   “A few particular children,” Luka said aloud, remembering, “who can defy Time’s power just by being born, and make us all young again.” It had been his mother who had said that first, or something very like it—he knew this because she had made a point of telling him so—but soon enough the idea became a part of Rashid’s inexhaustible storehouse of tall stories. “Yes,” he admitted to Luka with a shameless grin, “I stole that from your ma. Don’t forget: if you’re going to be a thief, steal the good stuff.”
“Well,” thought Luka the Thief of the Fire of Life, “I acted on your advice, Dad, and look what I stole, and you see where it’s got me now.”

The three hooded figures standing on the battlements of the Cloud Fortress of Baadal-Garh were neither large nor imposing. Their faces were invisible and their arms were crossed, as if they were cradling babies. They said nothing, but they didn’t need to. It was plain from the expression on Soraya’s face, and from Coyote’s cringing whine (Madre de Dios, if I warnt on a carpet in the sky right now I’d jus make a run for it an take my chances), and the quivering of the Elephant Birds (“Okay, maybe we don’t want to do stuff after all! Maybe we just want to live, and remember stuff, like we’re supposed to!”), that their mere appearance struck terror into the people of the Magic World. Even the grizzled Old Boy, the great Titan himself, was fidgeting nervously. Luka knew that they were all thinking fearfully about Sniffelheim, about being imprisoned forever in solid blocks of ice. Or possibly they were worrying about liver-eating birds. “Hmm,” he thought, “it looks like our Magic Friends aren’t going to be much use in this situation. It’s up to the Real World team to pull this off somehow.”
Then the Aalim spoke, in unison, three low, unearthly voices whose triple coldness felt steely, like three invincible swords. Even courageous Soraya quailed at the sound. “I never thought I would be forced to hear the Voices of Time,” she cried, and put her hands over her ears. “Oh, oh! It’s unbearable! I can’t stand it!” and she fell to her knees in pain. The other magic beings were similarly distressed and writhed around on the Flying Carpet in evident agony, except for the Old Boy, whose tolerance for pain was obviously very great after that eternity at the mercy of the liver-munching Bird of Zeus. Dog, the bear, looked unimpressed, however, and Bear, the dog, whose hackles were up, bared his teeth in an angry snarl.
“You have taken us away from our Handloom,” the soft sword-voices said. “We are Weavers, the three of us, and on the Loom of Days we weave the Threads of Time, weaving the whole of Becoming into the fabric of Being, the whole of Knowing into the cloth of the Known, the whole of Doing into the garment of the Done. Now you have taken us from our Loom and things are disorderly. Disorder displeases us. Displeasure displeases us also. Therefore we are doubly displeased.” And then, after a pause: “Return what you have stolen and perhaps we will spare your lives.”
“Look at what’s happening around you!” Luka shouted back. “Can’t you see it? The calamity of this whole World? Don’t you want to save it? That’s what I’m trying to do, and all you have to do is get out of my way and let me get home—”
“It is of no consequence to us whether this World lives or dies,” came the reply.
Luka was shocked. “You don’t care?” he asked disbelievingly.
“Compassion is not our affair,” the Aalim replied. “The ages go by heartlessly whether people wish them to do so or not. All things must pass. Only Time itself endures. If this World ends, another will continue. Happiness, friendship, love, suffering, pain are fleeting illusions, like shadows on a wall. The seconds march forward into minutes, the minutes into days, the days into years, unfeelingly. There is no ‘care.’ Only this knowledge is Wisdom. This wisdom alone is Knowledge.”
The seconds were indeed marching forward, and at home in Kahani, Rashid Khalifa’s life was ebbing away. “The Aalim are my mortal enemies,” he had said, and so they were. Passion rose up in Luka, and a scream of angry love burst out of him. “Then I curse you, just as I cursed Captain Aag!” he yelled at the Three Jo’s. “He caged his animals, and treated them cruelly, and you’re exactly the same, to be honest with you. You think you have everyone in your cage, and so you can ignore us and torment us and make us do what you want, and you don’t care about anything except yourselves. Well, curse you, all three of you! What are you, anyway? Jo-Hua, the Past has gone and will never return, and if it lives on, it’s only in our memories—and the memories of the Elephant Birds, of course—and it’s certainly not standing up there on the ramparts of this Cloud Fortress, wearing a stupid hood. As for you, Jo-Hai, the Present hardly exists, even a boy my age knows that. It vanishes into the past every time I blink an eye, and nothing as, um, temporary as that has much power over me. And Jo-Aiga? The Future? Give me a break. The Future is a dream, and nobody knows how it will turn out. The only sure thing is that we—Bear, Dog, my family, my friends, and us—we will make it whatever it is, good or bad, happy or sad, and we certainly don’t need you to tell us what it is. Time isn’t a trap, you phoneys. It’s just the road I’m on, and I’m in a real hurry right now, so get out of my way. Everyone here has been scared of you for too long. May they lose their fear and—and—and put you on ice for a change. Stop bothering me now. I—I snap my fingers at you.”
So there it was. He had defied Time’s power, just as his mother (and, later, his father) had said he could, and all he had at the end of it was his recently acquired ability to snap his fingers loudly. It wasn’t much of a weapon, really. But it was interesting, wasn’t it, that the Aalim had been stopped in their tracks by his curse, and that they had put their heads together and were muttering and murmuring—it seemed to Luka—helplessly? Was that possible? Might it be that they were powerless against Luka Khalifa’s famous Cursing Power? Could it be that they knew that he was one of the Particular Children who would not be the victims of Time? If this was Rashid Khalifa’s Magic World, then were the Aalim his creation, too, and therefore subject to his laws? Very deliberately, like a sorcerer casting a spell, Luka lifted his left hand high above his head and snapped his fingers with all his might.
Right on cue, the encircling Cloud Fortress of Baadal-Garh began to shake like cheap theater scenery, and, as the prisoners on the Flying Carpet watched in astonishment, large sections of the crenellated walls of that aerial jail began to crack and fall. “It’s under attack from the outside!” Luka yelled, and everyone on the Flying Carpet began to cheer as the Aalim disappeared from view to face the unexpected assault. “Who is it?” Soraya asked, gathering her strength and looking extremely embarrassed about her moment of weakness. “Is it the Otter Air Force? If so, they’re on a suicide mission, I’m afraid.” The naked Titan shook his head, and a slow grin spread over his huge face. “It’s not the Otters,” he said. “The gods are revolting.”
“Well, on the whole we agree about what the gods are like,” said the Elephant Birds, “but there’s no need to be rude.”
“I mean,” said the Old Boy with a sigh, “that the gods have risen in revolt.”
And so they had. Looking back on these events later in his life, Luka was never sure if the Revolt of the Gods had been provoked by his speech under the Tree of Terror, when he had tried to persuade the forgotten deities that their survival depended on his father’s; or if it had been conjured up by his Curse, whose purpose had been to break the stranglehold of the Aalim over the affairs of both worlds, the Real and the Magical; or if the retired immortals had decided that enough was enough, and Luka and his friends had just been around at the right time to witness the consequences. Whatever the reason, the hornet swarm of the ex-gods of the Heart of Magic flew through the rip in the sky and descended in wrath upon the Cloud Fortress of Baadal-Garh. Bast the Cat Goddess of Egypt, Hadadu the Akkadian Thunder God, Gong Gong the Flood God of China whose head was so strong that it could crack the Pillar of Heaven, Nyx the Greek Night Goddess, the savage Nordic Fenris Wolf, Quetzalcoatl the Plumed Serpent of Mexico, and assorted Demons, Valkyries, Rakshasas, and Goblins could be seen alongside the big fellows, Ra, Zeus, Tlaloc, Odin, Anzu, Vulcan, and the rest, burning the Cloud Fortress, hurling tsunamis against its walls, blasting it with lightning, head-butting it, and, in the case of Aphrodite and the other Beauty Goddesses, complaining loudly about the Ravages of Time on their complexions, their figures, and their hair.
If there had been a force field protecting the Cloud Fortress, the Assault of Magic* had been too much for it. And as the collected might of all the former deities demolished the Aalim’s stronghold, and a loud, strange, screechy, miaowing sound was heard, Luka shouted at Soraya, “This is our chance!” and at once the Flying Carpet rose high into the sky and bore its passengers away at speed.
The getaway wasn’t easy. The Aalim were making their last stand; their day was ending, but they still had some loyal servants to call on. Soraya had only just set a course for the Bund, the embankment on the river Silsila where Luka would have to leap back into the Real World, when a squadron of bizarre one-legged birds, the fabled Shang Yang, or Rainbirds, of China, assaulted the Flying Carpet from above. The Shang Yang carried whole rivers in their beaks and poured them over the Resham in an attempt to extinguish the Fire burning in the Ott Pot around Luka’s neck. The Carpet lurched sideways and plunged downward under the weight of the falling avalanches of water; but then, showing remarkable powers of recovery, it straightened itself out and flew onward. The assault of the Rainbirds continued; five, six, seven times the floods fell from the sky, and the Carpet’s passengers fell over, collided with one another, and rolled dangerously near the edges of the Carpet. Still the defensive bubble held firm. At last the Shang Yang’s water supply ran dry, and they flapped bad-temperedly away. “Yes, it’s good to have resisted this attack, but it’s not the end of the trouble,” Soraya warned the cheering Luka. “The Aalim have made one more desperate effort to prevent the Fire of Life from crossing over into the Real World. You heard that dreadful, piteous miaowing sound that filled the air as we left the Cloud Fortress? That was the Aalim playing their final card. I’m sorry to tell you that that noise was the Summons that unleashes the deadly Rain Cats.”
The Rain Cats—for it is time, at last, to speak of catty matters!—started falling from the sky soon enough. They were large Cats, raintigers and rainlions, rainjaguars and raincheetahs, Water Felines of every spot and stripe. They were made of the rain itself, rain enchanted by the Aalim and turned into sabre-toothed Wildcats. They fell as cats fall, nimbly, fearlessly, and when they hit the Flying Carpet’s invisible security bubble they dug their claws in and held on. Soon there were Rain Cats all over the bubble, hundreds of them, then thousands, and their claws were long and powerful, and they slashed at the bubble to great and damaging effect. “I’m afraid they will break through the shield,” cried Soraya, “and there are too many of them for us to fight.”
“No, there aren’t! Come down here, Fraidy Cats! We’ll soon show you what’s what!” Bear, the dog, barked bravely at the clawing, slashing Rain Cats above him, and the Old Boy prepared to grow to his full height again, but Luka knew all of that was just empty bravado. Thousands of feral enchanted felines would surely overpower even the great Titan, and while Bear and Dog (and maybe even Coyote) would fight for all they were worth, and no doubt Soraya had plenty of tricks up her sleeve, there could, in the end, be no victory against such unequal odds. “Every time I think we’ve cracked it,” Luka thought, “there’s another impossible obstacle in my way.” He took Soraya’s hand and squeezed it. “I only have one hundred and sixty-five lives left, and I don’t think they will be enough to get me through this last test,” he said. “So if we lose here, I just want to say thank you, because I would never have come half this far without your help.” The Insultana of Ott squeezed his hand back, looked over his shoulder, and burst into a wide smile. “No need to get sentimental on me just yet, stupid boy,” she said, “because you’re not only making too many enemies, although you do seem to have no shortage of those. Look behind you. You’re also acquiring some pretty powerful friends.”
Enormous banks of cloud had piled up behind the Flying Carpet of King Solomon the Wise; but, Soraya pointed out with glee, those were not mere clouds. They were the assembled Wind Gods of the Magic World. “And their presence here,” she said reassuringly, “means that the gods are definitely determined to get you home to do what you have to do.”
Now Luka saw the faces of the Wind Gods inside the cloud banks, cloud faces puffing up their cheeks and blowing with all their might. “Three Chinese Wind Gods are here,” Soraya said very excitedly, “Chi Po, Feng-Po-Po, and Pan-Gu! And you see that bunch of flying Wind-Lions, the Fong-shih-ye from the Kinmen archipelago of Taiwan? The Chinese usually refuse to speak to them, or even to accept that they exist—but here they are, working together! It’s really amazing how everyone has united behind you! Fujin from Japan has come, and he never goes anywhere. Look there, all the American gods, the Iroquois deity Ga-Oh, and Tate of the Sioux, and, see, the ferocious Cherokee Wind Spirit, Oonawieh Unggi, over there! I mean, the Sioux and the Cherokee were never allies, and to join up with the Iroquois Confederacy—oh, my! And even Chup the Wind God of the Chumash tribe from California has stopped sunbathing and showed up; he’s usually too laid back to rustle up much more than a light breeze. And the Africans are here as well—that’s Yansan the Yoruba Wind Goddess! And from Central and South America, Ecalchot of the Niquiran Indians, and the Mayan Pauahtuns, and Unáhsinte of the Zuni Indians, and Guabancex from the Caribbean … they’re so old, that lot, that frankly I thought they had blown themselves out, but it looks like they have plenty of puff left! And fat Fa’atiu the Samoan is over there, and bulgy Buluga of the Andaman Islands is over there, and Ara Tiotio the Tornado God of Polynesia, and Paka’a from Hawaii. And Ays the Armenian Wind Demon, and the Vila, the Slav Goddesses, and the Norse winged giant Hraesvelg who makes the winds just by flapping his wings, and the Korean goddess Yondung Halmoni—she’d be blowing better if she wasn’t stuffing her mouth with rice cakes, the greedy creature!—and Mbon from Burma, and Enlil—”
“Stop, please stop,” Luka begged. “It doesn’t matter what they’re called—what they’re doing is more than enough.” What they were doing was this: they were blowing away the Rain Cats. With many loud roars and yowls the Rain Cats lost their grip on the bubble around the Flying Carpet and were sent flying to nowhere, blown head over heels into the depths of the broken sky. A great cry of happiness went up from everyone aboard the Resham, and then the Wind Gods really got going, and the Carpet began to travel at the most amazing speed. Even Soraya with all her skill could not have made it go half as fast. The Magic World below them and the sky above became a blur. All Luka could see was the Carpet itself and the massed Wind Gods behind it, blowing him all the way home. “Get me back in time,” he thought fervently once again. “Please don’t let me be too late, just get me back in time.”

The wind dropped, the Carpet landed, the Wind Gods disappeared, and Luka was home: not on the bank of the Silsila as he had expected, but in his very own lane, in front of his very own house, in the very place where he first heard Dog and Bear speak, where he first met Nobodaddy and embarked on his great adventure. The colors of the world were still strange, the sky still too blue, the dirt too brown, the house much pinker and greener than usual; nor was it normal for a Flying Carpet to be parked here, with a Sultana of the Magic World, a Titan, a Coyote, and two Elephant Birds aboard, all of them looking distinctly ill at ease.
“The truth is we don’t belong here, at the Frontier,” said Soraya, as Luka, Dog, the bear, and Bear, the dog, stepped off Resham into the dusty lane. “So, since you have to go, go quickly, so that we also can be off. Go to that other Soraya who lives in that house, and when you pop that Ott Potato into your father’s mouth, don’t forget it was the Insultana of Ott who gave it to you; and afterward, as you grow into a young man, think about that Insultana sometimes, if you don’t completely forget.”
“I’ll never forget you,” Luka said, “but please, can I ask you one last question: can I pick up an Ott Potato with my bare hands? And if I put it into my dad’s mouth, won’t it burn him to bits?”
“The Fire of Life does not wound those it touches,” said Soraya of Ott. “Rather, it heals wounds. You will not find that glowing vegetable too hot to pick up. Nor will it do your father anything but good. There are six Ott Potatoes in that Pot, by the way,” she concluded, “one for each of you, if that’s what you decide.”
“Good-bye, then,” said Luka, and then he turned to the Old Boy and added, “And I meant to say, I’m sorry about what happened to Captain Aag, bcause he was your brother, after all.” The Old Boy shrugged. “Nothing to be sorry about,” he said. “I never liked him anyway.” Then, without further ado, the Insultana Soraya raised her arms, and the Flying Carpet of King Solomon the Wise rose into the sky and vanished with only a soft whoosh for farewell.
Luka looked at his front door, and saw, standing on the doorstep, glistening in the day’s first light, a large golden orb: the Saving Point for the end of Level Nine, the end of the “game” that hadn’t been a game at all but, as Nobodaddy had said, a matter of life and death. “Come on!” he shouted to Dog and Bear. “Let’s go home!” He ran toward the Saving Point and just as he reached it he stumbled, as he had known he would; he managed to kick the point with his left leg as he lurched awkwardly to his right; he heard, for the last time, the telltale ding that confirmed his achievement; he saw all the numbers vanish from his field of vision; he felt oddly giddy for a moment; then he regained his balance, and saw that the golden orb had vanished, and the colors of the world had returned to normal. He understood that he had left the World of Magic behind, and was back where he needed to be. “And it looks like the same exact time it was when I left,” he marveled. “So all of that never happened, except, of course, that it did.” The Ott Pot was still hanging from his neck, and he could feel its warmth on his chest. He took a deep breath and ran indoors and up the stairs as fast as he could run, and Bear, the dog, and Dog, the bear, came, too.
The sweet smells of home welcomed him back: his mother’s perfume, the thousand and one mysteries of the kitchen, the freshness of clean sheets, the accumulated fragrances of everything that had happened between those walls during all the years of his life, and the older, more obscure scents that had hung in the air since before he was born. And at the top of the stairs was his brother, Haroun, with a strange expression on his face. “You’ve been somewhere, haven’t you?” Haroun said. “You’ve been up to something. I can see it on your face.” Luka charged past him, saying, “I don’t have time to explain it right now, to be honest with you,” and Haroun turned and ran after him. “I knew it,” he said. “You’ve had your adventure! So come on, out with it! And by the way, what’s that hanging from your neck?” Luka ran on without replying, and Bear, the dog, and Dog, the bear, pushed their way past Haroun as Luka rushed into his father’s bedroom. They had been part of the adventure, too, and they didn’t intend to miss the final scene.
Rashid Khalifa lay in his bed, Asleep with his mouth open, just as he had been when Luka had last seen him, and the tubes were still running into his arm, and the monitor by his bedside showed that his heart was still beating, but very, very faintly. He looked happy, though, he still looked happy, as if he were being told a story that he loved. And by his bedside stood Luka’s mother, Soraya, with her fingers fluttering at her lips, and Luka understood, the moment he ran into the room and saw her, that she was about to kiss her fingertips and then touch Rashid’s mouth, because she was saying good-bye.
“What on earth are you doing, running in here like a crazy person?” Soraya cried, and then Bear, the dog, Dog, the bear, and Haroun charged in as well. “Stop it, all of you,” she demanded. “What is this? A playground? A circus? What?”
“Please, Mum,” Luka begged, “there’s no time to explain—please just let me do what I have to do.” And without waiting for his mother’s reply, he popped an Ott Potato, glowing with the Fire of Life, into his father’s open mouth, where, to his amazement, it dissolved instantly. Luka, staring fiercely through his father’s lips, saw little tongues of fire dive down into Rashid’s insides; and then they were gone, and for an instant nothing happened, and Luka’s heart sank. “Aah,” his mother was complaining, “what on earth have you done, you silly boy …?” But then the scolding words died on her lips because she, and everyone else in the room, saw the color return to Rashid’s face; after which a glow of health spread across his cheeks, almost as if he were blushing with embarrassment; and the monitor by the bedside began to drum out a firm, regular heartbeat.
Rashid’s hands began to move. His right hand darted out without warning and started tickling Luka, and Soraya gasped to see it, half with delight at the miracle of it, half with something like fear. “Stop tickling me, Dad,” Luka said joyfully, and Rashid Khalifa said without opening his eyes, “I’m not tickling you—Nobody is,” and then he turned over on his side to attack Luka with his left hand as well. “You are, you are tickling me,” Luka laughed, and Rashid Khalifa, opening his eyes, and grinning widely, said innocently, “Me? Tickling you? No, no. That’s just Nonsense.”
Rashid sat up, stretched, yawned, and gave Luka a funny, inquisitive look. “I’ve been having the strangest dream about you,” he said. “Let me see if I can remember it. You went adventuring in the World of Magic, I think that was it, and the whole place was falling apart. Hmm, and there were Elephant Birds, and Respecto-Rats, and a real, honest-to-goodness Flying Carpet, and then there was the little matter of becoming a Fire Thief and stealing the Fire of Life. You wouldn’t by any chance know anything about that dream, young Luka? You wouldn’t by some unlikely chance be able to fill in the blanks?”
“Maybe so and maybe no,” said Luka shyly, “but you should know already, Dad, because, to be honest with you, it felt like you were right there with me all the time, advising me and filling me in, and I’d have been lost without you.”
“That makes two of us, then,” said the Shah of Blah, “because I’d be lost right now if it wasn’t for your little exploit, that’s for sure. Or, your not-so-little exploit. Or, in fact, your supercolossal ultra-exploit. Not that I want you to grow a big head or anything. But the Fire of Life. Really. Quite a feat. Hmm, hmm. Ott Potatoes, is it? And could that thing hanging from your neck in fact be an actual Ott Pot?”
“I don’t know what you two are talking about,” said Soraya Khalifa contentedly, “but it’s good to hear the old rubbish being spoken in this house again.”
That wasn’t the end of the story, however. Just as Luka was relaxing, certain that his job was done at last, he heard an unpleasant bubbling noise welling up from a corner of his father’s bedroom and there, to his horror, was a Creature he thought he had seen for the last time when the Old Boy hurled him out into the deeps of space. It wasn’t wearing a vermilion bush shirt or a Panama hat anymore; it was colorless and faceless, because Rashid Khalifa had gone back into himself, and though this vile death-thing was plainly trying to gather itself into some sort of human shape, it succeeded only in looking twisted and hideous and sort of sticky, as if it were made out of glue. “You don’t get rid of me as easily as that,” it hissed. “You know why. Somebody has to die. I told you at the beginning there was a catch, and that’s it. Once I’ve been called into being, I don’t leave until I’ve swallowed a life. No arguments, okay? Somebody has to die.”
“Go away!” Luka shouted. “You lost. My father’s fine now. Just bubble off to wherever it is you go.”
Rashid, Soraya, and Haroun looked at him in amazement. “Who are you talking to?” Haroun asked. “There’s nothing in that corner, you know.” But Bear, the dog, and Dog, the bear, could see the Creature all right, and before Luka could say any more it was Bear who interrupted. “How about,” he asked the Creature, “if an immortal being gives up his Immortality?”
“Why is Bear barking like that?” Soraya asked, bewildered. “I don’t understand what’s happening.”
“Remember?” Bear asked Luka urgently. “ ‘I am Barak of the It-Barak, a thousand years old and more’? Turned into a dog by a Chinese curse? You didn’t like it much when I told you that, because you wanted me to be your dog and nothing else. Well, now that’s all I want to be, too. After a thousand years, that’s it. To hell with the past! And who wants to live for another thousand years? Enough of all that! I just want to be your dog, Bear.”
“That’s too big a sacrifice,” said Luka, overwhelmed by his dog’s loyalty and selfless courage. “I can’t ask you to make it.”
“I’m not asking you to ask me,” said Bear, the dog.
“That dog is a lot noisier than I recall,” Rashid said. “Luka, can’t you quieten him down?”
“An Immortality,” said the Creature in the corner hungrily. “Mmm! Yes, yes! To swallow an Immortality! To suck it out of the Immortal and fill up with it, leaving the ex-Immortal behind in mortal form! Oh, yes. That would be very sweet indeed.”
“Ahem,” said Dog, the bear, suddenly. “There is something I would like to confess.” At that moment, Luka thought, Dog looked sheepish, not bearish at all. “You know that story I told you—about being a prince who could spin air into gold? And Bulbul Dev the bird-headed ogre, and so on?”
“Of course I remember,” Luka said.
“See, husband, now the bear is growling, and the boy is talking to the bear,” said Soraya helplessly. “These animals—and your son as well—are really getting to be impossible to control.”
“It wasn’t true,” admitted Dog, the bear, hanging his head in shame. “The only thing I spun out of thin air was that yarn, that shaggy-dog story—or shaggy-bear story, maybe I should say. I just thought I ought to have a good story to tell. I thought it was expected of me at the time, especially after Bear here sang that song about himself. I made it up to make myself look good. I shouldn’t have done it. I’m sorry.”
“Don’t worry,” said Luka. “This is a storyteller’s house. You should know what it’s like by now. Everybody here makes up stories all the time.”
“That’s settled, then,” said Bear, the dog. “Only one of us has an Immortal life to give up, and that one is me.” And without waiting for any further discussion he ran to the corner where the Creature was crouching, and leapt; and Luka saw the Creature open a ghastly sort of mouth impossibly wide, and he saw Bear being swallowed up by that mouth; and then Bear was ejected again, looking the same, only different, and the Creature had become Bear-shaped, too: No-Bear, instead of Nobodaddy. “Ohh,” cried the Creature. “Ohh, ecstasy, ecstasy!” And there was a sort of backward flash, as if light were being sucked into a point instead of exploding out from a point, and the Bear-Creature imploded, whoommpppfff, and then it wasn’t there anymore.
“Woof,” said Bear, the dog, wagging his tail.
“What do you mean, ‘woof’?” Luka demanded. “Cat got your tongue?”
“Growl,” said Dog, the bear.
“Oh,” said Luka, understanding. “The magic part really is over now, isn’t it? And from now on you’re just my ordinary dog and my ordinary bear, and I’m just ordinary me.”
“Woof,” said Bear, the dog, and jumped up against Luka and licked his face. Luka hugged him tightly. “After what you just did,” he said, “I’ll never let anybody think of dogs as bad-luck animals, because it was a lucky day for all of us when you became my dog.”
“Will somebody please tell me what is going on?” Soraya said faintly.
“It’s okay, Mum,” said Luka, hugging her as tightly as he could. “Calm down. Life is finally back to being ordinary again.”
“There’s nothing ordinary about you,” his mother answered, kissing the top of his head. “And, ordinary life? In this family, we know there’s no such thing.”

On the flat roof of the Khalifa house, that cool evening, a dinner table was set out under the stars—yes, the stars had come out again!—and a feast was eaten, a feast of delicious slowly roasted meat and quickly pan-fried vegetables, of sour pickles and sweetmeats and cold pomegranate juice and hot tea, but also of some rarer foods and drinks—happiness soup, curried excitement, and great-relief ice cream. At the very center of the table, in their little Ott Pot, were the remaining five Ott Potatoes, glowing softly with the Fire of Life. “So this other Soraya you became so fond of,” said Soraya Khalifa to Luka, just a little too sweetly, “she said that if a healthy person eats one of these it can give them long life, and maybe even let them live forever?”
Luka shook his head. “No, Mum,” he said, “it wasn’t the Insultana of Ott who said that. It was Ra the Supreme.”
In spite of a life spent with the fabled Shah of Blah, Soraya Khalifa had never entirely liked this fanciful stuff, which she now had to put up with from both her sons as well as her storyteller husband. Tonight, though, she was making a real effort. “And this Ra …,” she began, and Luka finished the sentence for her, “… told me that personally, speaking in Hieroglyph, which was translated for me by a talking squirrel named Ratatat.”
“Oh, never mind,” said Soraya, giving up. “All’s well that ends well, and as for these so-called Ott Potatoes, I’ll just tuck them away in the pantry, and we can decide what to do with them on another day.”
Luka had just been wondering how it would be if he, his brother, his mother, and his father could all live forever. The idea struck him as more frightening than exciting. Maybe his dog, Bear, had been right, and it was better to do without Immortality, or even the possibility of it. Yes—maybe it would be better if Soraya hid the Ott Potatoes somewhere, so that all the Khalifas could slowly forget about their existence; and then maybe they, the Potatoes in their Pot, would finally get bored of waiting to be eaten, and would slip back across the Frontier into the World of Magic, and the Real World would be Real again, and life would be just that, life, and that would be more than enough.
The night sky was full of stars. “As we know,” said Rashid Khalifa, “sometimes the stars start dancing, and then anything can happen. But some nights it’s good to see everything just staying put in its rightful place, so that we can all relax.”
“Relax, my foot,” said Soraya. “The stars may not be dancing, but we’re certainly going to.”
She clapped her hands, and at once Dog, the bear, got up on his hind legs and began to stamp out the African Gumboot Dance, and Bear, the dog, jumped up and began to howl a Top-Ten melody, and then the Khalifa family leapt to its feet and began to jig about energetically, and to join in the dog’s song as well. And we’ll leave them there, the rescued father, the loving mother, the older brother, and the young boy home from his great adventure, along with his lucky dog and his brotherly bear, up on the roof of their home on a cool night under the stationary, unchanging stars, singing and dancing.

* (Or, to give it its full title, The Overthrow of the Dictatorship of the Aalim by the Inhabitants of the Heart of the Magical World, and Its Replacement by a More Sensible Relationship with Time, Allowing for Dream-time, Lateness, Vagueness, Delays, Reluctances, and the Widespread Dislike of Growing Old)

