Chapter 38
Hoshino looked up rental car agencies in the Yellow Pages, picked one at random, and phoned them. “I just need a car for a couple of days,” he explained, “so an ordinary sedan’s fine. Nothing too big, nothing that stands out.”
“Maybe I shouldn’t say this,” the rental clerk said, “but since we only rent Mazdas, we don’t have a single car that stands out. So rest assured.”
“Great.”
“How about a Familia? A very reliable car, and I swear nobody will notice it at all.”
“Sounds good. The Familia it is.” The rental agency was near the station, and Hoshino told them he’d be over in an hour to pick up the car.
He took a taxi over, showed them his credit card and license, then rented the car for two days. The white Familia parked in the lot was, as advertised, totally unobtrusive. Turn away from it for a moment and every memory of what it looked like vanished. A notable achievement in the field of anonymity.
Driving back to the apartment, Hoshino stopped at a bookstore and picked up maps of Takamatsu city and the Shikoku highway system. He popped into a CD shop nearby to see if they had a copy of Beethoven’s Archduke Trio, but the little shop had only a small classical section and one cheap, discount-bin version of the piece. Not the Million-Dollar Trio, unfortunately, but Hoshino went ahead and paid his eight dollars.
Back in the apartment, a soothing fragrance filled the place. Nakata was bustling around the kitchen preparing some steamed daikon and deep-fried flat tofu. “I had nothing to do, so I made a few dishes,” he explained.
“That’s great,” Hoshino said. “I’ve been eating out too much these days, and it’ll be nice to have a home-cooked meal for a change. Oh, hey—I got the car. It’s parked outside. Do you need it right away?”
“No, tomorrow would be fine. Nakata has to talk more with the stone today.”
“Good idea. Talking things over is important. Whether you’re talking with people, or things, or whatever, it’s always better to discuss things. You know, when I’m driving trucks I often talk to the engine. You can hear all kinds of things if you listen closely.”
“Nakata can’t talk with engines, but it is important to discuss things.”
“So how’s it going with the stone? You able to communicate?”
“We’re starting to.”
“That’s good. I was wondering—is the stone upset we brought it here?”
“No, not at all. As far as I can make out, the stone doesn’t much care where it is.”
“Whew—that’s a relief,” Hoshino sighed. “After all we’ve been through, if the stone turns on us we’re up a creek.”
Hoshino spent the afternoon listening to his new CD. The performance wasn’t as spontaneous and memorable as the one he’d heard in the coffee shop. It was more restrained and steady, but overall not so bad. As he lay back on the couch and listened, the lovely melody got to him, the subtle convolutions of the fugue stirring up something deep inside.
If I’d listened to this music a week ago, he told himself, I wouldn’t have understood the first thing about it—or even wanted to. But chance brought him to that little coffee shop, where he sank back in that comfortable chair, enjoyed the coffee, and listened to the music. And now look at me, he thought, I’m into Beethoven—can you believe it? A pretty amazing development.
He played the piece over and over, testing out his newfound appreciation for music. The CD contained a second Beethoven trio, the Ghost. Not such a bad piece, he thought, though the Archduke was definitely his favorite. More depth, he concluded. All the while, Nakata was off in a corner, facing the white stone and muttering. Occasionally he’d nod or scratch his head. Two men off in their own little worlds.
“Does the music bother you?” Hoshino asked him.
“No, it’s fine. Music doesn’t bother me. To me it’s like the wind.”
“The wind, huh?”
At six Nakata made dinner—grilled salmon and a salad, plus a number of little side dishes he’d concocted. Hoshino switched on the TV and watched the news to see if there were any developments in the murder case. But there wasn’t a word about it. Just other news—a kidnapping of an infant girl, the usual Israeli and Palestinian reprisals, a massive traffic accident on a highway in western Japan, a carjacking ring headed by foreigners, some cabinet minister’s stupid discriminatory remark, layoffs at companies in the communication industry. Not a single upbeat story.
The two of them sat at the table and ate their dinner.
“This is really good,” Hoshino said. “You’re quite a cook.”
“Much obliged. But you’re the first person I’ve ever cooked for.”
“You’re telling me you never eat with friends or relatives or anybody?”
“Nakata knew many cats, but what we eat is very different.”
“Well, yeah,” Hoshino said. “But, anyway, this is delicious. Especially the vegetables.”
“I’m happy you like it. Nakata can’t read, so sometimes I make some terrible mistakes in the kitchen. So I always use the same ingredients and cook things the same way. If I could read, I could make all kinds of different dishes.”
“These are just fine.”
“Mr. Hoshino?” Nakata said in a serious tone, sitting up straight.
“Yeah?”
“Not being able to read makes life tough.”
“I imagine so,” Hoshino said. “The commentary with this CD says Beethoven was deaf. He was a famous composer, the top pianist in Europe when he was young. But then one day, maybe because of illness, he started to go deaf. In the end he couldn’t hear a thing. Pretty rough to be a composer who can’t hear. You know what I mean?”
“I think so.”
“A deaf composer’s like a cook who’s lost his sense of taste. A frog that’s lost its webbed feet. A truck driver with his license revoked. That would throw anybody for a loop, don’t you think? But Beethoven didn’t let it get to him. Sure, he must have been a little depressed at first, but he didn’t let misfortune get him down. It was like, Problem? What problem? He composed more than ever and came up with better music than anything he’d ever written. I really admire the guy. Like this Archduke Trio—he was nearly deaf when he wrote it, can you believe it? What I’m trying to say is, it must be tough on you not being able to read, but it’s not the end of the world. You might not be able to read, but there are things only you can do. That’s what you gotta focus on—your strengths. Like being able to talk with the stone.”
“Yes, I am able to talk with it a little now. Nakata used to be able to talk with cats.”
“No one else can do that, right? Other people can read all the books they want and they’re still not gonna know how to talk to stones or cats.”
“These days, though, Nakata’s having a lot of dreams. In my dreams, for some reason, I’m able to read. I’m not as dumb as I am now. I’m so happy and I go to the library and read lots of books. And I’m thinking how wonderful it is to be able to read. I’m reading one book after another, but then the light in the library goes out and it’s dark. Somebody turned off the light. I can’t see a thing. I can’t read any more books. And then I wake up. Even if it’s only in a dream, it’s wonderful to be able to read.”
“Interesting… ,” Hoshino said. “And here I’m able to read and hardly ever pick up a book. The world’s a mixed-up place, that’s for sure.”
“Mr. Hoshino?” Nakata asked.
“What’s up?”
“What day of the week is it today?”
“It’s Saturday.”
“So tomorrow would be Sunday?”
“Normally, yeah.”
“Would you drive me tomorrow morning?”
“Sure, but where do you want to go?”
“Nakata doesn’t know. I’ll think about it after I get in the car.”
“Believe it or not,” Hoshino said, “I had a feeling that’s what you were going to say.”
Hoshino woke up the next morning just after seven. Nakata was already up cooking breakfast. Hoshino went to the bathroom, scrubbed his face with cold water, and shaved with an electric razor. They breakfasted on rice, miso soup with eggplant, dried mackerel, and pickles. Hoshino had a second helping of rice.
While Nakata washed the dishes Hoshino watched the news on TV. This time there was a short piece on the murder in Nakano. “Ten days have passed since the incident, but the police still have no leads,” the NHK announcer droned. An impressive front gate of a house flashed on the screen, cordoned off, with a patrolman stationed outside.
“The search continues for the missing fifteen-year-old son of the deceased, though his whereabouts remain unknown. The search continues as well for a man in his sixties who lives in the neighborhood and stopped by a police station right after the incident to provide information regarding the murder. It remains unclear whether or not there is a connection between these two people. Because the inside of the house was undisturbed, the police believed that the crime was an act of personal revenge rather than a robbery gone bad and are investigating Mr. Tamura’s friends and acquaintances. At the Tokyo National Modern Art Museum, where Mr. Tamura’s artistic achievements are being honored—”
“Hey, Gramps,” Hoshino called out to Nakata in the kitchen.
“Yes? What is it?”
“Do you know the son of this guy that was murdered in Nakano? This fifteen-year-old?”
“No, I don’t. As I told you, all Nakata knows about is Johnnie Walker and his dog.”
“Yeah?” Hoshino replied. “The police are looking for that boy, too. An only child, it sounds like, and there’s no mention of his mom. I guess he ran away from home just before the murder and he’s still missing.”
“Is that so…”
“A hard nut to crack, this murder,” Hoshino said. “But the police are a pretty tight-lipped bunch—they always know more than they let on. According to Colonel Sanders, they’re on to you, and know you’re in Takamatsu. Plus they know some handsome guy like me’s with you. But they haven’t leaked that to the media yet. They’re afraid if they let on we’re here, we’ll hightail it somewhere else. That’s why they’re insisting they don’t know where we are, publicly. A delightful bunch, cops.”
At eight-thirty they went out to the rental car and climbed in. As he settled down into the passenger seat, Nakata had his usual thermos of hot tea with him, as well as his faithful shapeless hat, umbrella, and canvas bag. As they were leaving the apartment Hoshino was about to put on his Chunichi Dragons cap when he glanced in the mirror and was brought up short. The police must know the young guy they were looking for would be decked out in a Dragons ball cap, green Ray-Bans, and an aloha shirt. There couldn’t be many people with Dragons caps on here in Takamatsu, and add on Ray-Bans and the shirt and he’d stick out like a sore thumb. So that’s why Colonel Sanders stocked the place with inconspicuous navy blue polo shirts—he must’ve anticipated this. Nothing gets by him, Hoshino thought, and tossed the sunglasses and cap aside.
“So, where to?” he asked.
“Anywhere is fine,” Nakata replied. “Just circle around the city.”
“You sure?”
“You can go wherever you like. I’ll just enjoy the scenery.”
“This is a first,” Hoshino said. “I’ve done my share of driving—both in the Self-Defense Force and with the truck company—and I’m a decent driver, if I say so myself. But every time I get behind the wheel, I know where I’m going and beeline it right there. That’s just the way I am, I guess. Nobody’s ever told me, You can go wherever you like—anywhere is fine. You’re kind of baffling me here.”
“Nakata is very sorry.”
“It’s okay—no need to apologize. I’ll do my best,” Hoshino said. He slipped the CD of the Archduke Trio into the player. “I’ll just drive all over the city while you enjoy the view. Is that okay?”
“Yes, that would be fine.”
“I’ll stop the car when you find what you’re looking for. And then the story will develop in a new direction. Do I have that right?”
“Yes, that’s what might happen,” Nakata said.
“Let’s hope so,” Hoshino said, and unfolded the city map in his lap.
The two of them drove through the city, Hoshino marking each street on a block to make sure they’d covered every one, then heading over to the next. They took an occasional break so Nakata could enjoy a cup of tea, and Hoshino a Marlboro. The Archduke Trio played over and over. At noon they stopped by a diner and had curry.
“But what the heck are you looking for?” Hoshino asked after they’d eaten.
“I don’t know. But I think—”
“—that you’ll know it when you see it. And until you see it, you won’t know what it is.”
“Yes, that’s correct.”
Hoshino shook his head listlessly. “I knew what you were gonna say, but I just had to be sure.”
“Mr. Hoshino?”
“Yeah?”
“It might take some time before I find it.”
“That’s okay. We’ll do our best. The boat’s left the dock, and we’re stuck on it.”
“Are we going to take a boat?” Nakata asked.
“No. No boats for the time being.”
At three they went into a coffee shop, where Hoshino had a cup of coffee. Nakata puzzled over his order, finally going with the iced milk. By this time Hoshino was exhausted from all the driving and didn’t feel like talking. He’d had his fill of Beethoven. Driving around in a circle, getting nowhere, didn’t suit him. He had to keep his speed down and pay careful attention to what he was doing, and he was getting bored. An occasional patrol car would pass by, and Hoshino did his best to avoid eye contact. He also tried to avoid passing in front of any police boxes. The Mazda Familia might be just about the most inconspicuous car on the road, but if the police spotted the same car passing by a few times they might very well pull him over. He drove cautiously, making absolutely sure he didn’t rear-end anybody. An accident would put everything in jeopardy.
As Hoshino drove around the city, checking the map as he went, Nakata sat motionless, hands on the window, scanning the passing scenery, intently searching for something, for all the world like a child or a well-behaved dog. They each concentrated on their task until evening, and hardly a word passed between them.
“What are you searching for?” Out of desperation Hoshino started singing an Inoue Yosui tune. He couldn’t recall the rest of the lyrics, so he made them up as he went along.

Haven’t you found it yet?
The sun is soon setting…
And Hoshino’s stomach is growling.
Driving round and round sets my head spinning.

They went back to the apartment at six.
“Let’s continue tomorrow,” Nakata said.
“We covered a lot of territory today. We can probably finish up the whole city tomorrow,” Hoshino said. “Hey—I got a question for you.”
“And what might that be?”
“If you don’t find what you’re looking for in Takamatsu, then what?”
Nakata gave his head a good rub. “If we can’t find it in Takamatsu, then we’ll have to look farther out.”
“And if you still can’t find it, then what’re we supposed to do?”
“If that happens, then we have to search even more.”
“We’ll just make bigger and bigger circles and eventually we’ll find it. Like the saying goes, if a dog walks on, it’s bound to bump into a stick.”
“Yes, I think that will happen,” Nakata said. “But Nakata doesn’t understand. Why does a dog have to hit a stick if it walks? If there’s a stick in front of it, the dog can go around it.”
Hoshino puzzled this over. “Yeah, I guess you’re right. I never thought about it before… ”
“It’s very strange.”
“Let’s put the dog and the stick aside for a minute, okay?” Hoshino said. “That only complicates things. What I want to know is how far are we going to search? If we don’t watch out, before we know it we’ll wind up in another prefecture—Ehime or Kochi or someplace. Summer will be over and it’ll be fall by then.”
“That may well be. But I have to find it, even if it’s fall or winter. I know I can’t ask you to help me forever. Nakata will just walk alone and keep on searching.”
“Let’s not worry about that for right now,” Hoshino stammered. “But can’t the stone be a pal and give us a hint or something? Even an approximate location would help.”
“Nakata’s very sorry, but the stone doesn’t say much.”
“Yeah, it doesn’t strike me as the talkative type,” Hoshino said. “I don’t imagine it’s much good at swimming, either. Whatever… We don’t need to think about it now. Let’s get a good night’s sleep and see what tomorrow brings.”
The next day it was the same routine, with Hoshino this time circling the western half of the city. By now his city map was full of yellow lines. Only the increased number of yawns coming from the driver set this day apart from the previous one. Nakata kept his face plastered against the window, intently studying the passing scenery, and they hardly spoke. Whatever Nakata was looking for, he didn’t find it.
“Would today be Monday?” Nakata asked.
“Yup. Yesterday was Sunday, so today’s Monday,” Hoshino said. Then, almost in desperation, he made up a melody to some words that popped into his head:

If today is Monday,
tomorrow must be Tuesday.
Ants are hard workers, swallows like to dress up.
The chimney’s tall, the setting sun red.

“Mr. Hoshino,” Nakata said after a while.
“Yeah?”
“You can look at ants working for a long time and never tire of it.”
“I suppose you’re right,” Hoshino replied.
At noon they stopped by a restaurant specializing in eel and ordered the lunch special, a bowl of rice topped with eel. At three they went to a coffee shop, where Hoshino had coffee, Nakata kelp tea. By six p.m. the map was a mass of yellow marks, the anonymous tires of the Familia having traversed every square inch of road in the city. But still no luck.
What are you searching for? Hoshino sang again in a listless voice: Haven’t you found it yet? / We’ve gone everywhere in town. / My butt’s aching, so can’t we go home?
After he finished, he said, “We keep this up much longer, I’ll turn into a regular singer-songwriter,” Hoshino said.
“What would that be?” Nakata asked.
“Never mind. Just a harmless joke.”
Calling it a day, they left the city, got on the highway, and headed back to the apartment. Lost in thought, Hoshino failed to turn left when he should. He tried to get back on the highway, but the road curved off at a strange angle into a maze of one-way streets and he was soon totally lost. Before he realized it they were in a residential area they’d never seen before, an old-looking, elegant neighborhood with high walls surrounding the homes. The road was strangely quiet, with not a soul in sight.
“I don’t think we’re too far from our apartment, but I have no idea where we are,” Hoshino admitted. He parked the car in an empty lot, cut the engine, set the parking brake, and spread out his map. He checked the name of the neighborhood and street number on a nearby lightpole and looked for it on the map. Maybe his eyes were too tired, but he couldn’t find it.
“Mr. Hoshino?” Nakata asked.
“Yeah?”
“I’m sorry to bother you, but what does it say on that sign over there on that gate?”
Hoshino looked up from his map and glanced where Nakata was pointing, down a high wall with an old-fashioned gate, and next to it a large wooden sign. The black gate was shut tight. “Komura Memorial Library,” Hoshino read. “Huh, a library in this deserted part of town? Doesn’t even look like a library. More like an old mansion.”
“Ko-mu-ra-Me-mori-al-Li-bra-ry?”
“You got it. Must be made to commemorate somebody named Komura. Who this Komura guy is, though, I have no idea.”
“Mr. Hoshino?”
“Yup?”
“That’s it.”
“What do you mean—that?”
“The place Nakata’s been searching for.”
Hoshino looked up from his map again and gazed into Nakata’s eyes. He frowned, looked at the sign, and slowly read it again. He patted a Marlboro out of the box, put it between his lips, and lit it with his plastic lighter. He slowly inhaled, then blew smoke out the open window. “Are you sure?”
“Yes, this is it.”
“Chance is a scary thing, isn’t it?” Hoshino said.
“It certainly is,” Nakata agreed.
