Alpha and Omega
THERE WAS TURMOIL in Bombay in the months after the election; there is turmoil in my thoughts as I recall those days. My error has upset me badly; so now, to regain my equilibrium, I shall place myself firmly on the familiar ground of Methwold’s Estate; leaving the history of the Midnight Children’s Conference to one side, and the pain of the Pioneer Café to another, I shall tell you about the fall of Evie Burns.
I have titled this episode somewhat oddly. “Alpha and Omega” stares back at me from the page, demanding to be explained—a curious heading for what will be my story’s halfway point, one that reeks of beginnings and ends, when you could say it should be more concerned with middles; but, unrepentantly, I have no intention of changing it, although there are many alternative titles, for instance “From Monkey to Rhesus,” or “Finger Redux,” or—in a more allusive style—“The Gander,” a reference, obviously, to the mythical bird, the hamsa or parahamsa, symbol of the ability to live in two worlds, the physical and the spiritual, the world of land-and-water and the world of air, of flight. But “Alpha and Omega” it is; “Alpha and Omega” it remains. Because there are beginnings here, and all manner of ends; but you’ll soon see what I mean.
Padma clicks her tongue in exasperation. “You’re talking funny again,” she criticizes, “Are you going to tell about Evie or not?”
… After the general election, the Central Government continued to shilly-shally about the future of Bombay. The State was to be partitioned; then not to be partitioned; then partition reared its head again. And as for the city itself—it was to be the capital of Maharashtra; or of both Maharashtra and Gujarat; or an independent state of its own … while the government tried to work out what on earth to do, the city’s inhabitants decided to encourage it to be quick. Riots proliferated (and you could still hear the old battle-song of the Mahrattas—How are you? I am well! I’ll take a stick and thrash you to hell!—rising above the fray); and to make things worse, the weather joined in the mêlée. There was a severe drought; roads cracked; in the villages, peasants were being forced to kill their cows; and on Christmas Day (of whose significance no boy who attended a mission school and was attended upon by a Catholic ayah could fail to be aware) there was a series of loud explosions at the Walkeshwar Reservoir and the main fresh-water pipes which were the city’s lifelines began to blow fountains into the air like giant steel whales. The newspapers were full of talk of saboteurs; speculation over the criminals’ identities and political affiliation jostled for space against reports of the continuing wave of whore-murders. (I was particularly interested to learn that the murderer had his own curious “signature.” The corpses of the ladies of the night were all strangled to death; there were bruises on their necks, bruises too large to be thumbprints, but wholly consistent with the marks which would be left by a pair of giant, preternaturally powerful knees.)
But I digress. What, Padma’s frown demands, does all this have to do with Evelyn Lilith Burns? Instantly, leaping to attention, as it were, I provide the answer: in the days after the destruction of the city’s fresh-water supply, the stray cats of Bombay began to congregate in those areas of the city where water was still relatively plentiful; that is to say, the better-off areas, in which each house owned its own overhead or underground water-tank. And, as a result, the two-storey hillock of Methwold’s Estate was invaded by an army of thirsting felines; cats swarming all over the circus-ring, cats climbing bougainvillaea creepers and leaping into sitting-rooms, cats knocking over flower-vases to drink the plant-stale water, cats bivouacked in bathrooms, slurping liquid out of water-closets, cats rampant in the kitchens of the palaces of William Methwold. The Estate’s servants were vanquished in their attempts to repel the great cat invasion; the ladies of the Estate were reduced to helpless exclamations of horror. Hard dry worms of cat-excrement were everywhere; gardens were ruined by sheer feline force of numbers; and at night sleep became an impossibility as the army found voice, and sang its thirst at the moon. (The Baroness Simki von der Heiden refused to fight the cats; she was already showing signs of the disease which would shortly lead to her extermination.)
Nussie Ibrahim rang my mother to announce, “Amina sister, it is the end of the world.”
She was wrong; because on the third day after the great cat invasion, Evelyn Lilith Burns visited each Estate household in turn, carrying her Daisy air-gun casually in one hand, and offered, in return for bounty money, to end the plague of pussies double-quick.
All that day, Methwold’s Estate echoed with the sounds of Evie’s air-gun and the agonized wauls of the cats, as Evie stalked the entire army one by one and made herself rich. But (as history so often demonstrates) the moment of one’s greatest triumph also contains the seeds of one’s final downfall; and so it proved, because Evie’s persecution of the cats, was as far as the Brass Monkey was concerned, absolutely the last straw.
“Brother,” the Monkey told me grimly, “I told you I’d get that girl; now, right now, the time has come.”
Unanswerable questions: was it true that my sister had acquired the languages of cats as well as birds? Was it her fondness for feline life which pushed her over the brink? … by the time of the great cat invasion, the Monkey’s hair had faded into brown; she had broken her habit of burning shoes; but still, and for whatever reason, there was a fierceness in her which none of the rest of us ever possessed; and she went down into the circus-ring and yelled at the top of her voice: “Evie! Evie Burns! You come out here, this minute, wherever you are!”
Surrounded by fleeing cats, the Monkey awaited Evelyn Burns. I went out on to the first-floor verandah to watch; from their verandahs, Sonny and Eyeslice and Hairoil and Cyrus were watching too. We saw Evie Burns appear from the direction of the Versailles Villa kitchens; she was blowing the smoke away from the barrel of her gun.
“You Indians c’n thank your stars you got me around,” Evie declared, “or you’d just’ve got eaten by these cats!”
We saw Evie fall silent as she saw the thing sitting tensely in the Monkey’s eyes; and then like a blur the Monkey descended on Evie and a battle began which lasted for what seemed like several hours (but it can only have been a few minutes). Shrouded in the dust of the circus-ring they rolled kicked scratched bit, small tufts of hair flew out of the dust-cloud and there were elbows and feet in dirtied white socks and knees and fragments of frock flying out of the cloud; grown-ups came running, servants couldn’t pull them apart, and in the end Homi Catrack’s gardener turned his hose on them to separate them … the Brass Monkey stood up a little crookedly and shook the sodden hem of her dress, ignoring the cries of retribution proceeding from the lips of Amina Sinai and Mary Pereira; because there in the hose-wet dirt of the circus-ring lay Evie Burns, her tooth-braces broken, her hair matted with dust and spittle, her spirit and her dominion over us broken for once and for all.
A few weeks later her father sent her home for good, “To get a decent education away from these savages,” he was heard to remark; I only heard from her once, six months later, when right out of the blue she wrote me the letter which informed me that she had knifed an old lady who had objected to her assault on a cat. “I gave it to her all right,” Evie wrote, “Tell your sister she just got lucky.” I salute that unknown old woman: she paid the Monkey’s bill.
More interesting than Evie’s last message is a thought which occurs to me now, as I look back down the tunnel of time. Holding before my eyes the image of Monkey and Evie rolling in the dirt, I seem to discern the driving force behind their battle to the death, a motive far deeper than the mere persecution of cats: they were fighting over me. Evie and my sister (who were, in many ways, not at all dissimilar) kicked and scratched, ostensibly over the fate of a few thirsty strays; but perhaps Evie’s kicks were aimed at me, perhaps they were the violence of her anger at my invasion of her head; and then maybe the strength of the Monkey was the strength of sibling-loyalty, and her act of war was actually an act of love.
Blood, then, was spilled in the circus-ring. Another rejected title for these pages—you may as well know—was “Thicker Than Water.” In those days of water shortages, something thicker than water ran down the face of Evie Burns; the loyalties of blood motivated the Brass Monkey; and in the streets of the city, rioters spilled each other’s blood. There were bloody murders, and perhaps it is not appropriate to end this sanguinary catalogue by mentioning, once again, the rushes of blood to my mother’s cheeks. Twelve million votes were colored red that year, and red is the color of blood. More blood will flow soon: the types of blood, A and O, Alpha and Omega—and another, a third possibility—must be kept in mind. Also other factors: zygosity, and Kell antibodies, and that most mysterious of sanguinary attributes, known as rhesus, which is also a type of monkey.
Everything has shape, if you look for it. There is no escape from form.
But before blood has its day, I shall take wing (like the parahamsa gander who can soar out of one element into another) and return, briefly, to the affairs of my inner world; because although the fall of Evie Burns ended my ostracism by the hilltop children, still I found it difficult to forgive; and for a time, holding myself solitary and aloof, I immersed myself in the events inside my head, in the early history of the association of the midnight children.
To be honest: I didn’t like Shiva. I disliked the roughness of his tongue, the crudity of his ideas; and I was beginning to suspect him of a string of terrible crimes—although I found it impossible to find any evidence in his thoughts, because he, alone of the children of midnight, could close off from me any part of his thoughts he chose to keep to himself—which, in itself, increased my growing dislike and suspicion of the rat-faced fellow. However, I was nothing if not fair; and it would not have been fair to have kept him apart from the other members of the Conference.
I should explain that as my mental facility increased, I found that it was possible not only to pick up the children’s transmissions; not only to broadcast my own messages; but also (since I seem to be stuck with this radio metaphor) to act as a sort of national network, so that by opening my transformed mind to all the children I could turn it into a kind of forum in which they could talk to one another, through me. So, in the early days of 1958, the five hundred and eighty-one children would assemble, for one hour, between midnight and one a.m., in the lok sabha or parliament of my brain.
We were as motley, as raucous, as undisciplined as any bunch of five hundred and eighty-one ten-year-olds; and on top of our natural exuberance, there was the excitement of our discovery of each other. After one hour of top-volume yelling jabbering arguing giggling, I would fall exhausted into a sleep too deep for nightmares, and still wake up with a headache; but I didn’t mind. Awake I was obliged to face the multiple miseries of maternal perfidy and paternal decline, of the fickleness of friendship and the varied tyrannies of school; asleep, I was at the center of the most exciting world any child had ever discovered. Despite Shiva, it was nicer to be asleep.
Shiva’s conviction that he (or he-and-I) was the natural leader of our group by dint of his (and my) birth on the stroke of midnight had, I was bound to admit, one strong argument in its favor. It seemed to me then—it seems to me now—that the midnight miracle had indeed been remarkably hierarchical in nature, that the children’s abilities declined dramatically on the basis of the distance of their time of birth from midnight; but even this was a point of view which was hotly contested … “Whatdoyoumeanhowcanyousaythat,” they chorused, the boy from the Gir forest whose face was absolutely blank and featureless (except for eyes noseholes spaceformouth) and could take on any features he chose, and Harilal who could run at the speed of the wind, and God knows how many others … “Who says it’s better to do one thing or another?” And, “Can you fly? I can fly!” And, “Yah, and me, can you turn one fish into fifty?” And, “Today I went to visit tomorrow. You can do that? Well then—” … in the face of such a storm of protest, even Shiva changed his tune; but he was to find a new one, which would be much more dangerous—dangerous for the Children, and for me.
Because I had found that I was not immune to the lure of leadership. Who found the Children, anyway? Who formed the Conference? Who gave them their meeting-place? Was I not the joint-eldest, and should I not receive the respect and obeisances merited by my seniority? And didn’t the one who provided the club-house run the club? … To which Shiva, “Forget all that, man. That club-shub stuff is only for you rich boys!” But—for a time—he was overruled. Parvati-the-witch, the conjurer’s daughter from Delhi, took my part (just as, years later, she would save my life), and announced, “No, listen now, everybody: without Saleem we are nowhere, we can’t talk or anything, he is right. Let him be the chief!” And I, “No, never mind chief, just think of me as a … a big brother, maybe. Yes; we’re a family, of a kind. I’m just the oldest, me.” To which Shiva replied, scornful, but unable to argue: “Okay, big brother: so now tell us what we do?”
At this point I introduced the Conference to the notions which plagued me all this time: the notions of purpose, and meaning. “We must think,” I said, “what we are for.”
I record, faithfully, the views of a typical selection of the Conference members (excepting the circus-freaks, and the ones who, like Sundari the beggar-girl with the knife-scars, had lost their powers, and tended to remain silent in our debates, like poor relations at a feast): among the philosophies and aims suggested were collectivism—“We should all get together and live somewhere, no? What would we need from anyone else?”—and individualism—“You say we; but we together are unimportant; what matters is that each of us has a gift to use for his or her own good”—filial duty—“However we can help our father-mother, that is what it is for us to do”—and infant revolution—“Now at last we must show all kids that it is possible to get rid of parents!”—capitalism—“Just think what businesses we could do! How rich, Allah, we could be!”—and altruism—“Our country needs gifted people; we must ask the government how it wishes to use our skills”—science—“We must allow ourselves to be studied”—and religion—“Let us declare ourselves to the world, so that all may glory in God”—courage—“We should invade Pakistan!”—and cowardice—“O heavens, we must stay secret, just think what they will do to us, stone us for witches or what-all!”; there were declarations of women’s rights and pleas for the improvement of the lot of untouchables; landless children dreamed of land and tribals from the hills, of Jeeps; and there were, also, fantasies of power. “They can’t stop us, man! We can bewitch, and fly, and read minds, and turn them into frogs, and make gold and fishes, and they will fall in love with us, and we can vanish through mirrors and change our sex … how will they be able to fight?”
I won’t deny I was disappointed. I shouldn’t have been; there was nothing unusual about the children except for their gifts; their heads were full of all the usual things, fathers mothers money food land possessions fame power God. Nowhere, in the thoughts of the Conference, could I find anything as new as ourselves … but then I was on the wrong track, too; I could not see any more clearly than anyone else; and even when Soumitra the time-traveller said, “I’m telling you—all this is pointless—they’ll finish us before we start!” we all ignored him; with the optimism of youth—which is a more virulent form of the same disease that once infected my grandfather Aadam Aziz—we refused to look on the dark side, and not a single one of us suggested that the purpose of Midnight’s Children might be annihilation; that we would have no meaning until we were destroyed.
For the sake of their privacy, I am refusing to distinguish the voices from one another; and for other reasons. For one thing, my narrative could not cope with five hundred and eighty-one fully-rounded personalities; for another, the children, despite their wondrously discrete and varied gifts, remained, to my mind, a sort of many-headed monster, speaking in the myriad tongues of Babel; they were the very essence of multiplicity, and I see no point in dividing them now. (But there were exceptions. In particular, there was Shiva; and there was Parvati-the-witch.)
… Destiny, historical role, numen: these were mouthfuls too large for ten-year-old gullets. Even, perhaps, for mine; despite the ever-present admonitions of the fisherman’s pointing finger and the Prime Minister’s letter, I was constantly distracted from my sniff-given marvels by the tiny occurrences of everyday life, by feeling hungry or sleepy, by monkeying around with the Monkey, or going to the cinema to see Cobra Woman or Vera Cruz, by my growing longing for long trousers and by the inexplicable below-the-belt heat engendered by the approaching School Social at which we, the boys of the Cathedral and John Connon Boys’ High School, would be permitted to dance the box-step and the Mexican Hat Dance with the girls from our sister institution—such as Masha Miovic the champion breast-stroker (“Hee hee,” said Glandy Keith Colaco) and Elizabeth Purkiss and Janey Jackson—European girls, my God, with loose skirts and kissing ways!—in short, my attention was continually seized by the painful, engrossing torture of growing up.
Even a symbolic gander must come down, at last, to earth; so it isn’t nearly enough for me now (as it was not then) to confine my story to its miraculous aspects; I must return (as I used to return) to the quotidian; I must permit blood to spill.
The first mutilation of Saleem Sinai, which was rapidly followed by the second, took place one Wednesday early in 1958—the Wednesday of the much-anticipated Social—under the auspices of the Anglo-Scottish Education Society. That is, it happened at school.
Saleem’s assailant: handsome, frenetic, with a barbarian’s shaggy moustache: I present the leaping, hair-tearing figure of Mr. Emil Zagallo, who taught us geography and gymnastics, and who, that morning, unintentionally precipitated the crisis of my life. Zagallo claimed to be Peruvian, and was fond of calling us jungle-Indians, bead-lovers; he hung a print of a stern, sweaty soldier in a pointy tin hat and metal pantaloons above his blackboard and had a way of stabbing a finger at it in times of stress and shouting, “You see heem, you savages? Thees man eez civilization! You show heem respect: he’s got a sword!” And he’d swish his cane through the stone-walled air. We called him Pagal-Zagal, crazy Zagallo, because for all his talk of llamas and conquistadores and the Pacific Ocean we knew, with the absolute certainty of rumor, that he’d been in a Mazagaon tenement and his Goanese mother had been abandoned by a decamped shipping agent; so he was not only an “Anglo” but probably a bastard as well. Knowing this, we understood why Zagallo affected his Latin accent, and also why he was always in a fury, why he beat his fists against the stone walls of the classroom; but the knowledge didn’t stop us being afraid. And this Wednesday morning, we knew we were in for trouble, because Optional Cathedral had been cancelled.
The Wednesday morning double period was Zagallo’s geography class; but only idiots and boys with bigoted parents attended it, because it was also the time when we could choose to troop off to St. Thomas’s Cathedral in crocodile formation, a long line of boys of every conceivable religious denomination, escaping from school into the bosom of the Christians’ considerately optional God. It drove Zagallo wild, but he was helpless; today, however, there was a dark glint in his eye, because the Croaker (that is to say, Mr. Crusoe the headmaster) had announced at morning Assembly that Cathedral was cancelled. In a bare, scraped voice emerging from his face of an anesthetized frog, he sentenced us to double geography and Pagal-Zagal, taking us all by surprise, because we hadn’t realized that God was permitted to exercise an option, too. Glumly we trooped into Zagallo’s lair; one of the poor idiots whose parents never allowed them to go to Cathedral whispered viciously into my ear, “You jus’ wait: he’ll really get you guys today.”
Padma: he really did.
Seated gloomily in class: Glandy Keith Colaco, Fat Perce Fishwala, Jimmy Kapadia the scholarship boy whose father was a taxi-driver, Hairoil Sabarmati, Sonny Ibrahim, Cyrus-the-great and I. Others, too, but there’s no time now, because with eyes narrowing in delight, crazy Zagallo is calling us to order.
“Human geography,” Zagallo announces. “Thees ees what? Kapadia?”
“Please sir don’t know sir.” Hands fly into the air—five belong to church-banned idiots, the sixth inevitably to Cyrus-the-great. But Zagallo is out for blood today: the godly are going to suffer. “Feelth from the jongle,” he buffets Jimmy Kapadia, then begins to twist an ear casually, “Stay in class sometimes and find out!”
“Ow ow ow yes sir sorry sir …” Six hands are waving but Jimmy’s ear is in danger of coming off. Heroism gets the better of me … “Sir please stop sir he has a heart condition sir!” Which is true; but the truth is dangerous, because now Zagallo is rounding on me: “So, a leetle arguer, ees eet?” And I am being led by my hair to the front of the class. Under the relieved eyes of my fellow-pupils—thank God it’s him not us—I writhe in agony beneath imprisoned tufts.
“So answer the question. You know what ees human geography?”
Pain fills my head, obliterating all notions of telepathic cheatery: “Aiee sir no sir ouch!”
… And now it is possible to observe a joke descending on Zagallo, a joke pulling his face into the simulacrum of a smile; it is possible to watch his hand darting forward, thumb-and-forefinger extended; to note how thumb-and-forefinger close around the tip of my nose and pull downwards … where the nose leads, the head must follow, and finally the nose is hanging down and my eyes are obliged to stare damply at Zagallo’s sandalled feet with their dirty toenails while Zagallo unleashes his wit.
“See, boys—you see what we have here? Regard, please, the heedeous face of thees primitive creature. It reminds you of?”
And the eager responses: “Sir the devil sir.” “Please sir one cousin of mine!” “No sir a vegetable sir I don’t know which.” Until Zagallo, shouting above the tumult, “Silence! Sons of baboons! Thees object here”—a tug on my nose—“thees is human geography!”
“How sir where sir what sir?”
Zagallo is laughing now. “You don’t see?” he guffaws. “In the face of thees ugly ape you don’t see the whole map of India?”
“Yes sir no sir you show us sir!”
“See here—the Deccan peninsula hanging down!” Again ouch-mynose.
“Sir sir if that’s the map of India what are the stains sir?” It is Glandy Keith Colaco feeling bold. Sniggers, titters from my fellows. And Zagallo, taking the question in his stride: “These stains,” he cries, “are Pakistan! Thees birthmark on the right ear is the East Wing; and thees horrible stained left cheek, the West! Remember, stupid boys: Pakistan ees a stain on the face of India!”
“Ho ho,” the class laughs, “Absolute master joke, sir!”
But now my nose has had enough; staging its own, unprompted revolt against the grasping thumb-and-forefinger, it unleashes a weapon of its own … a large blob of shining goo emerges from the left nostril, to plop into Mr. Zagallo’s palm. Fat Perce Fishwala yells, “Lookit that, sir! The drip from his nose, sir! Is that supposed to be Ceylon?”
His palm smeared with goo, Zagallo loses his jokey mood. “Animal,” he curses me, “You see what you do?” Zagallo’s hand releases my nose; returns to hair. Nasal refuse is wiped into my neatly-parted locks. And now, once again, my hair is seized; once again, the hand is pulling … but upwards now, and my head has jerked upright, my feet are moving on to tiptoe, and Zagallo, “What are you? Tell me what you are!”
“Sir an animal sir!”
The hand pulls harder higher. “Again.” Standing on my toenails now, I yelp: “Aiee sir an animal an animal please sir aiee!”
And still harder and still higher … “Once more!” But suddenly it ends; my feet are flat on the ground again; and the class has fallen into a deathly hush.
“Sir,” Sonny Ibrahim is saying, “you pulled his hair out, sir.”
And now the cacophony: “Look sir, blood.” “He’s bleeding sir.” “Please sir shall I take him to the nurse?”
Mr. Zagallo stood like a statue with a clump of my hair in his fist. While I—too shocked to feel any pain—felt the patch on my head where Mr. Zagallo had created a monkish tonsure, a circle where hair would never grow again, and realized that the curse of my birth, which connected me to my country, had managed to find yet one more unexpected expression of itself.
Two days later, Croaker Crusoe announced that, unfortunately, Mr. Emil Zagallo was leaving the staff for personal reasons; but I knew what the reasons were. My uprooted hairs had stuck to his hands, like bloodstains that wouldn’t wash out, and nobody wants a teacher with hair on his palms, “The first sign of madness,” as Glandy Keith was fond of saying, “and the second sign is looking for them.”
Zagallo’s legacy: a monk’s tonsure; and, worse than that, a whole set of new taunts, which my classmates flung at me while we waited for school buses to take us home to get dressed for the Social: “Snotnose is a bal-die!” and, “Sniffer’s got a map-face!” When Cyrus arrived in the bus-queue, I tried to turn the crowd against him, by attempting to set up a chant of “Cyrus-the-great, Born on a plate, In nineteen hundred and forty-eight,” but nobody took up the offer.
So we come to the events of the Cathedral School Social. At which bullies became instruments of destiny, and fingers were transmuted into fountains, and Masha Miovic, the legendary breast-stroker, fell into a dead faint … I arrived at the Social with the nurse’s bandage still on my head. I was late, because it hadn’t been easy to persuade my mother to let me come; so by the time I stepped into the Assembly Hall, beneath streamers and balloons and the professionally suspicious gazes of bony female chaperones, all the best girls were already box-stepping and Mexican-Hatting with absurdly smug partners. Naturally, the prefects had the pick of the ladies; I watched them with passionate envy, Guzder and Joshi and Stevenson and Rushdie and Talyarkhan and Tayabali and Jussawalla and Waglé and King; I tried butting in on them during excuse-mes but when they saw my bandage and my cucumber of a nose and the stains on my face they just laughed and turned their backs … hatred burgeoning in my bosom, I ate potato chips and drank Bubble-Up and Vimto and told myself, “Those jerks; if they knew who I was they’d get out of my way pretty damn quick!” But still the fear of revealing my true nature was stronger than my somewhat abstract desire for the whirling European girls.
“Hey, Saleem, isn’t it? Hey, man, what happened to you?” I was dragged out of my bitter, solitary reverie (even Sonny had someone to dance with; but then, he had his forcep-hollows, and he didn’t wear underpants—there were reasons for his attractiveness) by a voice behind my left shoulder, a low, throaty voice, full of promises—but also of menace. A girl’s voice. I turned with a sort of jump and found myself staring at a vision with golden hair and a prominent and famous chest … my God, she was fourteen years old, why was she talking to me? … “My name is Masha Miovic,” the vision said, “I’ve met your sister.”
Of course! The Monkey’s heroines, the swimmers from Walsingham School, would certainly know the Schools champion breast-stroker! … “I know …” I stuttered, “I know your name.”
“And I know yours,” she straightened my tie, “so that’s fair.” Over her shoulder, I saw Glandy Keith and Fat Perce watching us in drooling paroxysms of envy. I straightened my back and pushed out my shoulders. Masha Miovic asked again about my bandage. “It’s nothing,” I said in what I hoped was a deep voice, “A sporting accident.” And then, working feverishly to hold my voice steady, “Would you like to … to dance?”
“Okay,” said Masha Miovic, “But don’t try any smooching.”
Saleem takes the floor with Masha Miovic, swearing not to smooch. Saleem and Masha, doing the Mexican Hat; Masha and Saleem, box-stepping with the best of them! I allow my face to adopt a superior expression; you see, you don’t have to be a prefect to get a girl! … The dance ended; and, still on top of my wave of elation, I said, “Would you care for a stroll, you know, in the quad?”
Masha Miovic smiling privately. “Well, yah, just for a sec; but hands off, okay?”
Hands off, Saleem swears. Saleem and Masha, taking the air … man, this is fine. This is the life. Goodbye Evie, hello breast-stroke … Glandy Keith Colaco and Fat Perce Fishwala step out of the shadows of the quadrangle. They are giggling: “Hee hee.” Masha Miovic looks puzzled as they block our path. “Hoo hoo,” Fat Perce says, “Masha, hoo hoo. Some date you got there.” And I, “Shut up, you.” Whereupon Glandy Keith, “You wanna know how he got his war-wound, Mashy?” And Fat Perce, “Hee hoo ha.” Masha says, “Don’t be crude; he got it in a sporting accident!” Fat Perce and Glandy Keith are almost falling over with mirth; then Fishwala reveals all. “Zagallo pulled his hair out in class!” Hee hoo. And Keith, “Snotnose is a baldie!” And both together, “Sniffer’s got a map-face!” There is puzzlement on Masha Miovic’s face. And something more, some budding spirit of sexual mischief … “Saleem, they’re being so rude about you!”
“Yes,” I say, “ignore them.” I try to edge her away. But she goes on, “You aren’t going to let them get away with it?” There are beads of excitement on her upper lip; her tongue is in the corner of her mouth; the eyes of Masha Miovic say, What are you? A man or a mouse? … and under the spell of the champion breast-stroker, something else floats into my head: the image of two irresistible knees; and now I am rushing at Colaco and Fishwala; while they are distracted by giggles, my knee drives into Glandy’s groin; before he’s dropped, a similar genuflection has laid Fat Perce low. I turn to my mistress; she applauds, softly. “Hey man, pretty good.”
But now my moment has passed; and Fat Perce is picking himself up, and Glandy Keith is already moving towards me … abandoning all pretence of manhood, I turn and run. And the two bullies are after me and behind them comes Masha Miovic calling, “Where are you running, little hero?” But there’s no time for her now, mustn’t let them get me, into the nearest classroom and try and shut the door, but Fat Perce’s foot is in the way and now the two of them are inside too and I dash at the door, I grab it with my right hand, trying to force it open, get out if you can, they are pushing the door shut, but I’m pulling with the strength of my fear, I have it open a few inches, my hand curls around it, and now Fat Perce slams all his weight against the door and it shuts too fast for me to get my hand out of the way and it’s shut. A thud. And outside, Masha Miovic arrives and looks down at the floor; and sees the top third of my middle finger lying there like a lump of well-chewed bubble-gum. This was the point at which she fainted.
No pain. Everything very far away. Fat Perce and Glandy Keith fleeing, to get help or to hide. I look at my hand out of pure curiosity. My finger has become a fountain: red liquid spurts out to the rhythm of my heart-beat. Never knew a finger held so much blood. Pretty. Now here’s nurse, don’t worry, nurse. Only a scratch. Your parents are being phoned; Mr. Crusoe is getting his car keys. Nurse is putting a great wad of cotton-wool over the stump. Filling up like red candy-floss. And now Crusoe. Get in the car, Saleem, your mother is going straight to the hospital. Yes sir. And the bit, has anybody got the bit? Yes headmaster here it is. Thank you nurse. Probably no use but you never know. Hold this while I drive, Saleem … and holding up my severed fingertip in my unmutilated left hand, I am driven to the Breach Candy Hospital through the echoing streets of night.
At the hospital: white walls stretchers everyone talking at once. Words pour around me like fountains. “O God preserve us, my little piece-of-the-moon, what have they done to you?” To which old Crusoe, “Heh heh. Mrs. Sinai. Accidents will happen. Boys will be.” But my mother, enraged, “What kind of school? Mr. Caruso? I’m here with my son’s finger in pieces and you tell me. Not good enough. No, sir.” And now, while Crusoe, “Actually the name’s—like Robinson, you know—heh heh,” the doctor is approaching and a question is being asked, whose answer will change the world.
“Mrs. Sinai, your blood group, please? The boy has lost blood. A transfusion may be necessary.” And Amina: “I am A; but my husband, O.” And now she is crying, breaking down, and still the doctor, “Ah; in that case, are you aware of your son’s …” But she, the doctor’s daughter, must admit she cannot answer the question: Alpha or Omega? “Well in that case a very quick test; but on the subject of rhesus?” My mother, through her tears: “Both my husband and I, rhesus positive.” And the doctor, “Well, good, that at least.”
But when I am on the operating table—“Just sit there, son, I’ll give you a local anesthetic, no, madam, he’s in shock, total anesthesia would be impossible, all right son, just hold your finger up and still, help him nurse, and it’ll be over in a jiffy”—while the surgeon is sewing up the stump and performing the miracle of transplanting the roots of the nail, all of a sudden there’s a fluster in the background, a million miles away, and “Have you got a second Mrs. Sinai” and I can’t hear properly … words float across the infinite distance … Mrs. Sinai, you are sure? O and A? A and O? And rhesus positive, both of you? Heterozygous or homozygous? No, there must be some mistake, how can he be … I’m sorry, absolutely and neither A nor … excuse me, Madam, but is he your … not adopted or … The hospital nurse interposes herself between me and the miles-away chatter, but it’s no good, because now my mother is shrieking, “But of course you must believe me, doctor; my God, of course he is our son!”
Neither A nor O. And the rhesus factor: impossibly negative. And zygosity offers no clues. And present in the blood, rare Kell antibodies. And my mother, crying, crying-crying, crying … “I don’t understand. A doctor’s daughter, and I don’t understand.”
Have Alpha and Omega unmasked me? Is rhesus pointing its unanswerable finger? And will Mary Pereira be obliged to … I wake up in a cool, white, Venetian-blinded room with All-India Radio for company. Tony Brent is singing: “Red Sails In The Sunset.”
Ahmed Sinai, his face ravaged by whisky and now by something worse, stands beside the Venetian blind. Amina, speaking in whispers. Again, snatches across the million miles of distance. Janumplease. Ibegyou. No, what are you saying. Of course it was. Of course you are the. How could you think I would. Who could it have. O God don’t just stand and look. I swear Iswearonmymother’shead. Now shh he is …
A new song from Tony Brent, whose repertoire today is uncannily similar to Wee Willie Winkie’s: “How Much Is That Doggie In The Window?” hangs in the air, floating on radio waves. My father advances on my bed, towers over me, I’ve never seen him look like this before. “Abba …” And he, “I should have known. Just look, where am I in that face. That nose, I should have …” He turns on his heel and leaves the room; my mother follows him, too distraught to whisper now: “No, janum, I won’t let you believe such things about me! I’ll kill myself! I’ll,” and the door swings shut behind them. There is a noise outside: like a clap. Or a slap. Most of what matters in your life takes place in your absence.
Tony Brent begins crooning his latest hit into my good ear: and assures me, melodiously, that “The Clouds Will Soon Roll By.”
… And now I, Saleem Sinai, intend briefly to endow myself-then with the benefits of hindsight; destroying the unities and conventions of fine writing, I make him cognizant of what was to come, purely so that he can be permitted to think the following thoughts: “O eternal opposition of inside and outside! Because a human being, inside himself, is anything but a whole, anything but homogeneous; all kinds of everywhichthing are jumbled up inside him, and he is one person one minute and another the next. The body, on the other hand, is homogeneous as anything. Indivisible, a one-piece suit, a sacred temple, if you will. It is important to preserve this wholeness. But the loss of my finger (which was conceivably foretold by the pointing digit of Raleigh’s fisherman), not to mention the removal of certain hairs from my head, has undone all that. Thus we enter into a state of affairs which is nothing short of revolutionary; and its effect on history is bound to be pretty damn startling. Uncork the body, and God knows what you permit to come tumbling out. Suddenly you are forever other than you were; and the world becomes such that parents can cease to be parents, and love can turn to hate. And these, mark you, are only the effects on private life. The consequences for the sphere of public action, as will be shown, are—were—will be no less profound.”
Finally, withdrawing my gift of foreknowledge, I leave you with the image of a ten-year-old boy with a bandaged finger, sitting in a hospital bed, musing about blood and noises-like-claps and the expression on his father’s face; zooming out slowly into long shot, I allow the sound-track music to drown my words, because Tony Brent is reaching the end of his medley, and his finale, too, is the same as Winkie’s: “Good Night, Ladies” is the name of the song. Merrily it rolls along, rolls along, rolls along …
(Fade-out.)
